A well with no shadow, a stick with a
shadow, one estimated distance between
them, and from [clears throat] that, the
circumference of the entire Earth. Over
2,000 years ago, Eratosthenes used
shadows and geometry to estimate the
size of our planet. This was done
without satellites, without seeing the
world from above. At Syene, the midday
sun at the summer solstice was said to
shine straight down. In Alexandria, at
that same moment, a vertical stick cast
a measurable shadow. That angle,
combined with the distance between the
two cities, let him scale up to the
circumference of the Earth itself.
[snorts] But that feat points to a much
bigger mystery.
If ancient and medieval people could not
see the world from above, how did they
draw a map at all? How did they know
where to go in travel or war? And
hardest of all,
how did they draw a coastline, something
too long, too irregular, and too deadly
to get wrong when no one could ever see
the whole shape at once?
That was the trap mapmakers lived inside
for thousands of years.
You cannot see what you are drawing.
You can only measure what you can reach,
time what you can travel, compare what
other people tell you, and hope the
errors do not multiply. If the map is
wrong, ships miss landfall, armies lose
direction, and travelers [music] die far
from where they thought they were.
Every map drawn before satellites was an
act of reconstruction, a guess corrected
by measurement, a coastline built piece
by piece, a world assembled from
fragments of other maps or knowledge
from past generations. This is how they
did
Long ago, map making already had two
faces. One face was symbolic. On a
Babylonian clay tablet, the world could
appear as a disc ringed by water, a
statement about order, identity, and the
edge of the unknown. The other face was
a measurement because if you want a map
to behave, if you want it to actually
work,
>> [music]
>> you need repeatable steps. You need
distances and directions and some way to
turn the ground into numbers. In early
societies, that often began with very
small things. A field, a canal, a city
wall, a boundary that had to be [music]
taxed, defended, or disputed. A scribe
or surveyor could mark lines on clay or
another surface, note lengths in
standard units, and turn lived space
into a simplified plan. That sounds
modest, but it is the beginning of
everything.
Before you can draw a continent, you
first have to learn how to draw a field.
The Greeks pushed the problem much
further. A field is local. The Earth is
not. Latitude was the easier
breakthrough. If you measure the height
of the Sun at noon or the height of a
known star above the horizon, you can
begin to estimate north to south
position. The sky becomes a measuring
tool. A shadow is no longer just a
shadow. It becomes location. And then
came Eratosthenes. His method is still
startling because it feels impossible
and obvious at the same time. If the
Sun's rays are effectively parallel,
then the distance between the Sun angle
at Syene and Alexandria reflects the
curvature of the Earth itself. 1/50 of a
circle in angle meant 1/50 of the whole
Earth in distance. The leap was
extraordinary. He did not just measure
land. He measured the planet. But the
triumph had a limit, and that limit
would haunt mapmakers for centuries.
Longitude was the nightmare. North to
south position could be estimated from
the sky. East to west position was a
problem of time. To know how far east or
west you are, you have to compare local
time with the time somewhere else. And
in antiquity, there was no reliable
portable clock for that. So, east to
[music] west position had to be patched
together from travel times, itinerary
distances, eclipse reports, sailing
estimates, and second-hand claims. It
was [music] the weakest line in ancient
geography, and it stayed weak for almost
2,000 years. That patchwork was
sharpened by Ptolemy. In his Geography,
he treated mapmaking as a construction
problem. Gather coordinates, set a grid,
choose a projection, and place the world
within that framework. He recorded
thousands of locations by latitude and
longitude.
>> [music]
>> You could build a map inside rules, then
argue about the data point by point.
Rome worked at a different scale. Roman
surveyors were not trying to solve the
whole Earth in one sweep. They were
trying to make land ownable, taxable,
divisible, and defensible. Their tools,
like the groma, helped lay out straight
lines and right angles across real
landscapes. Measure first, record
immediately. Turn ground into property,
and property into plan. And that reveals
an important divide. Land could often be
measured in pieces. A road, a field, a
frontier line. But coastlines [music]
were something else. A field stays where
it is. A coastline keeps escaping your
view. It curves away, disappears beyond
headlands, hides in mist, changes with
every new bay, rivermouth, shoal, and
harbor. Land surveying could discipline
territory. Coastlines would require a
much messier alliance of sailors,
memory, repeated voyages, and
correction. Still, the ancient world was
already building the tools that made
later mapping possible. Mathematics,
angular measurement, coordinates,
procedures, the idea that space could be
broken into reliable parts, and then
stitched back together again. Then, the
Western Empire fractured, and the
institutional continuity behind
large-scale state mapping became uneven
in Western Europe. The knowledge did not
vanish, but it changed shape. And here
is where most people get the story
wrong. Medieval Europeans did not simply
forget maps. They made different kinds
of maps for different kinds of purposes.
Some were not trying to guide a sailor
or an army. They were trying to explain
the world. That is the world of the
Mappa Mundi, the maps of the world. At
first glance, they can look strange to
modern eyes.
>> [music]
>> East might be at the top instead of
north. Jerusalem might sit at the
center. Biblical scenes, legends,
peoples, creatures, and historical
memory could share the page with rivers
and continents. A famous surviving
example, the Hereford Mappa Mundi, made
around 1300 on a single sheet of vellum,
was not a practical sailing chart. It
was closer to a visual encyclopedia, a
way of arranging geography, history,
theology, and meaning into one image.
But, that does not mean these maps were
careless. A medieval mapmaker still had
to work like a craftsman. Parchment had
to be prepared, layout had to be ruled,
text and image had to be planned before
the first serious stroke of ink. Place
names had to be fitted into space,
pigments had to be mixed. On an
expensive surface, every mistake hurt.
And, the method was still one of
compilation. The maker did not travel
the whole world. He gathered, he
compared older texts, inherited
sketches, reports, traditions, and
authorities, then fused them into one
coherent surface. In that sense, the
medieval mapmaker was doing something
deeply familiar, collecting fragments
and trying to force them into a
world-shaped hole. But, symbolic maps
could only go so far. A wall map in a
cathedral could explain the world. It
could not keep a ship off of a reef.
And, the sea does not care about
symbolism. The sea only rewards
accuracy. Elsewhere, other traditions
pushed that practical side much harder.
In the Islamic world, geography
inherited and reworked Greek coordinate
thinking, while also drawing on
travelers, merchants, and astronomers,
and administrators. At the court of
Roger the Second in Sicily, Muhammad
al-Idrisi completed one of the great
medieval geographic works in 1154.
What matters is not just that he made a
famous map. It is the method behind it,
combining earlier scholarship with
first-hand observation and eyewitness
reports, then organizing that material
into a more systematic description of
the world. That is evidence being
compared and filtered. In East Asia,
too, map-making remains tied to
administration, logistics, and technical
thinking. Earlier Chinese traditions had
already developed increasingly explicit
ideas about scale and directional
consistency. And by the 11th century,
Shen Kuo's writings included the first
known reference to the magnetic compass.
That matters because once direction can
be held more reliably, route knowledge
becomes more stable, especially at sea.
So, by the medieval period, several
things were becoming clear. A map could
be symbolic, administrative, scholarly,
or practical. The real test came on
water because seas and oceans strip away
illusion. On land, you can stop, ask,
compare, and turn around. At sea, a
small mistake does not stay small for
long. In an age without GPS and long
before longitude could be measured
reliably at sea, sailors had to survive
with partial truths. Direction could be
estimated from the sun, stars, and later
the compass. Distance had to be guessed
from speed and time. That method, dead
reckoning, was not random. You hold a
heading, estimate how fast you are
moving, count the hours, and update your
position. But if current or wind has
been lying to you, your map and your
body begin drifting apart. Near shore,
sailors looked for harder facts. A
leadsman could cast a weighted line and
read the depths by marks along the rope.
Some leads were prepared to bring up
sand or mud from the bottom, letting
sailors identify not just how deep the
water was, but what kind of seabed lay
beneath them. Depth, bottom texture,
familiar capes, harbor entrances, and
the shape of hills inland all became
clues. And now we reach the real heart
of the problem, coastlines. How do you
draw one without ever seeing it whole?
You do not draw it all at once. You
build it from repeated approach. A ship
leaves port and sails along a known
stretch of coast. The pilot notes the
bearing to the next headland, estimates
the distance, remembers where the bay
opens, where the water shallows, where a
harbor is safe, where a reef sits like a
trap. Another crew sails the same leg
later and confirms some of it, disputes
[music] some of it, adds a cove, a
shoal, a promontory, a river mouth. A
chart maker on land receives these
fragments, compares them, steps
distances with dividers, fixes them
against a directional framework, and
slowly the coast begins to harden on
parchment, not seen from above,
reconstructed from below, cape by cape,
harbor by harbor, voyage by voyage. This
is what makes the great medieval sea
charts so impressive. In Europe, the
clearest surviving examples of such
charts are the portolan charts that
appear from around 1300 onward. Their
defining web of rhumb lines radiates
across the surface, giving navigators a
directional framework tied to wind or
compass points. These charts
concentrated on what sailors actually
needed, coastlines, ports, hazards,
bearings, distances.
Their place names often ran
perpendicular to the coast, so the chart
could be turned and still read along the
shore. They were practical objects
shaped by use, and for their time, they
were remarkably accurate, especially in
heavily traveled waters like the
Mediterranean. Trade kept [music]
forcing correction after correction. The
more a coast was sailed, the more it
could be argued over. The more it was
argued over, the less it remained
guesswork. But, the limitations were
still there. If your distances are
estimated, small errors accumulate. If
your heading is magnetic rather than
perfectly true, drift accumulates. If a
coast is rarely visited, it stays vague.
And without a reliable solution to
longitude, east-to-west precision at sea
remains unstable. That's why on some
maps, we can see how much it relates to
nowadays in the center. [music] And the
further we go, it becomes more of a
guess.
So, even the best medieval charts were
not magic. They were disciplined
patchworks, extraordinary ones, but
patchworks all the same. Then, something
important returned to Europe from a
different direction. Ptolemy came back.
His Geography, long marginal in Latin
Europe, was translated into Latin in
around the 15th century. That mattered
because it reintroduced a powerful habit
of thought.
Coordinates, grids, projection,
construction by framework. Now,
mapmakers had two strong traditions side
by side. One grew out of practice,
voyage, and repeated correction. The
other grew out of theory, coordinates,
[music] and systematic placement. A
coastline was no longer just a line to
inherit. It was something you could
revise, defend, and rebuild within a
larger system.
If medieval mapping was a tug-of-war
between compilation and practical craft,
the early modern world is where
something begins to lock into place.
Surveying becomes an engine. Maps start
behaving like instruments. The crucial
leap is triangulation.
Instead of trusting a traveler's
estimate [music] for every distance,
you begin with one measured baseline.
Then, from each end of that line, you
measure the angles to a distant point.
Geometry does the rest.
Distances you never physically walked
can now be calculated. Space stops being
only reported. It starts being solved.
Gemma Frisius described this method in
1533,
and over time, it became central to
major state surveys.
From there, entire countries could be
pulled into geometric networks. In
France, the Cassini family's work helped
produce the first systematic national
survey map based on triangulation.
In Britain, the trigonometrical survey
laid the foundation for what became the
Ordnance Survey.
These were no longer maps built mainly
from inherited reports and route
fragments, but the oldest terror of
navigation still remained, longitude at
sea.
In 1714, [music] Britain passed the
Longitude Act, offering rewards for
workable solutions. Two broad paths
completed. One was astronomical, use the
moon and stars, and compare measured
angles against published tables to
determine time at a known reference
point. The other was mechanical, carry
that reference time with you aboard ship
in an accurate clock. John Harrison
devoted decades to that second path,
building timekeepers precise enough to
make longitude practical at sea. That
sounds technical, but the underlying
logic is simple and brutal. If local
noon tells you your own time and a
trusted clock tells you the time
somewhere else, the difference between
those two times tells you how far east
or west you are. At last, one of the
oldest weaknesses in mapmaking begins to
close.
Sea charts can be corrected more
precisely. Coastlines can be tied into
larger coordinate systems. The patchwork
starts becoming a framework. By the 18th
and 19th centuries, the world was being
mapped through a vast alliance of
geometry, astronomy, instruments,
paperwork, states, ships, and enormous
human labor. Men hauled equipment across
mountains, along deserts, through
forests, across coasts. The map still
did not come from seeing the whole world
from above.
It came from relentless measurement and
correction on the ground.
Maps were not simply drawn, but
assembled.
A scribe marks a field. A surveyor lays
out a road. A mathematician measures an
angle. A sailor notes a headland. A
chart maker compares conflicting [music]
reports. A later survey cuts through old
errors. And slowly, across generations,
the world is measured.
>> You can now explore our maps in even
more detail as prints and downloads.
Premium historical maps designed by
historians. Link below.
>> Hey.